---
{
  "id": "chapter-243",
  "title": "Chapter 2: Personnel Security and Risk Management Concepts",
  "order": 243,
  "source": {
    "href": "b01.xhtml",
    "anchor": "head-2-4"
  },
  "est_tokens": 2953,
  "slug": "chapter-2-personnel-security-and-risk-management-concepts",
  "meta": {
    "nav_title": "Chapter 2: Personnel Security and Risk Management Concepts",
    "enriched_from": "start-heading",
    "kind": "chapter"
  }
}
---
## Chapter 2: Personnel Security and Risk Management Concepts

- D. Regardless of the specifics of a security solution, humans are often considered the weakest element. No matter what physical or logical controls are deployed, humans can discover ways to avoid them, circumvent or subvert them, or disable them. Thus, it is important to take into account the humanity of your users when designing and deploying security solutions for your environment. Software products, internet connections, and security policies can all be vulnerabilities or otherwise areas of security concern, but they are not considered the most common weakest element of an organization.

- A. The first step in hiring new employees is to create a job description. Without a job description, there is no consensus on what type of individual needs to be found and hired. Crafting job descriptions is the first step in defining security needs related to personnel and being able to seek out new hires. From the job description, a determination can be made as to the education, skills, experience, and classification required by the applicant. Then a job posting can be made to request the submission of résumés. Then, candidates can be screened to see if they meet the requirements and if they have any disqualifications.

- B. Onboarding is the process of adding new employees to the organization, having them review and sign policies, be introduced to managers and coworkers, and be trained in employee operations and logistics. Reissue is a certification function when a lost certificate is provided to the user by extracting it from the escrow backup database or when a certificate is altered to extend its expiration date. Background checks are used to verify that a job applicant is qualified but not disqualified for a specific work position. A site survey is used to optimize the placement of wireless access points (WAPs) to provide reliable connectivity throughout the organization's facilities.

- B. A termination process often focuses on eliminating an employee who has become problematic, whether that employee is committing crimes or just violating company policy. Once the worker is fired, the company has little direct control over that person. So, the only remaining leverage is legal, which often relates to a nondisclosure agreement (NDA). Hopefully, reviewing and reminding the ex-employee about their signed NDA will reduce future security issues, such as confidential data dissemination. Returning the exiting employee's personal belongings is not really an important task to protect the company's security interests. Evaluating the exiting employee's performance could be done via an exit interview, but that was not mentioned in this scenario. Often when an adversarial termination occurs, an exit interview is not feasible. Canceling an exiting employee's parking permit is not a high security priority for most organizations, at least not in comparison to the NDA.

- C. Option C is correct: Multiparty risk exists when several entities or organizations are involved in a project. The risk or threats are often due to the variations of objectives, expectations, timelines, budgets, and security priorities of those involved. The other statements are false. Their corrected and thus true versions would be: (A) Using service- level agreements (SLAs) is a means to ensure that organizations providing services maintain an appropriate level of service agreed on by the service provider, vendor, or contractor and the customer organization; (B) Outsourcing can be used as a risk response option known as transference or assignment; and (D) Risk management strategies implemented by one party may in fact cause additional risks to or from another party.

- A. An asset is anything used in a business process or task. A threat is any potential occurrence that may cause an undesirable or unwanted outcome for an organization or for a specific asset. A vulnerability is the weakness in an asset, or the absence or the weakness of a safeguard or countermeasure. An exposure is being susceptible to asset loss because of a threat; there is the possibility that a vulnerability can or will be exploited. Risk is the possibility or likelihood that a threat will exploit a vulnerability to cause harm to an asset and the severity of damage that could result.

- B. The threat of a fire and the vulnerability of a lack of fire extinguishers lead to the risk of damage to equipment. This scenario does not relate to virus infection or unauthorized access. Equipment damaged by fire could be considered a system malfunction, but that option is not as direct as “damage to equipment.”

- D. This scenario is describing the activity of performing a quantitative risk assessment. The question describes the determination of asset value (AV) as well as the exposure factor (EF) and the annualized rate of occurrence (ARO) for each identified threat. These are the needed values to calculate the annualized loss expectancy (ALE), which is a quantitative factor. This is not an example of a qualitative risk assessment, since specific numbers are being determined rather than relying on ideas, reactions, feelings, and perspectives. This is not the Delphi technique, which is a qualitative risk assessment method that seeks to reach an anonymous consensus. This is not risk avoidance, since that is an optional risk response or treatment, and this scenario is only describing the process of risk assessment.

- C. The annual costs of safeguards should not exceed the expected annual cost of asset value loss. The other statements are not rules to follow. (A) The annual cost of the safeguard should not exceed the annual cost of the asset value or its potential value loss. (B) The cost of the safeguard should be less than the value of the asset. (D) There is no specific maximum percentage of a security budget for the cost of a safeguard. However, the security budget should be used efficiently to reduce overall risk to an acceptable level.

- C. When controls are not cost effective, they are not worth implementing. Thus, risk acceptance is the risk response in this situation. Mitigation is the application of a control; that was not done in this scenario. Ignoring risk occurs when no action, not even assessment or control evaluation, is performed in relation to a risk. Since controls were evaluated in this scenario, this is not ignoring risk. Assignment is the transfer of risk to a third party; that was not done in this scenario.

- A. The value of a safeguard to an organization is calculated by ALE before safeguard – ALE after implementing the safeguard – annual cost of safeguard [(ALE1 – ALE2) – ACS]. This is known as the cost/benefit equation for safeguards. The other options are incorrect. (B) This is an invalid calculation. (C) This is an invalid calculation. (D) This is the concept formula for residual risk: total risk – controls gap = residual risk.

- A, C, D. Statements of A, C, and D are all valid definitions of risk. The other two statements are not definitions of risk. (B) Anything that removes a vulnerability or protects against one or more specific threats is considered a safeguard or a countermeasure, not a risk. (E) The presence of a vulnerability when a related threat exists is an exposure, not a risk. A risk is a calculation of the probability of occurrence and the level of damage that could be caused if an exposure is realized (i.e., actually occurs).

- A. This situation is describing inherent risk. Inherent risk is the level of natural, native, or default risk that exists in an environment, system, or product prior to any risk management efforts being performed. The new application had vulnerabilities that were not mitigated, thus enabling the opportunity for the attack. This is not a risk matrix. A risk matrix or risk heat map is a form of risk assessment that is performed on a basic graph or chart, such as a 3×3 grid comparing probability and damage potential. This is not a qualitative risk assessment, since this scenario does not describe any evaluation of the risk of the new code. This is not residual risk, since no controls were implemented to reduce risk. Residual risk is the leftover risk after countermeasures and safeguards are implemented in reponse to original or total risk.

- C. The level of RMM named Defined requires that a common or standardized risk framework be adopted organization-wide. This is effectively level 3. The first level of RMM is not listed as an option; it is ad hoc, which is the chaotic starting point. Preliminary is RMM level 2, which demonstrates loose attempts to follow risk management processes but each department may perform risk assessment uniquely. Integrated is RMM level 4, where risk management operations are integrated into business processes, metrics are used to gather effectiveness data, and risk is considered an element in business strategy decisions. Optimized is RMM level 5, where risk management focuses on achieving objectives rather than just reacting to external threats, increasing strategic planning toward business success rather than just avoiding incidents, and reintegrating lessons learned into the risk management process.

- B. The RMF phase 6 is Authorize whether system or common controls based on a determination that the risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the nation is acceptable (or reasonable). The phases of RMF are (1) Prepare, (2) Categorize, (3) Select, (4) Implement, (5) Assess, (6) Authorize, and (7) Monitor. (A) RMF phase (2) is categorize the system and the information processed, stored, and transmitted by the system based on an analysis of the impact of loss. (C) RMF phase (5) is assess the controls to determine if the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcomes with respect to satisfying the security and privacy requirements. (D) RMF phase (7) is monitor the system and the associated controls on an ongoing basis to include assessing control effectiveness, documenting changes to the system and environment of operation, conducting risk assessments and impact analyses, and reporting the security and privacy posture of the system.

- B, F. The leaking of company proprietary data may have been caused by the content of emails received by workers. The computers of workers who clicked links from the suspicious emails may have been infected by malicious code. This malicious code may have exfiltrated documents to the social media site. This issue could occur whether workers were on company computers on the company network, on company computers on their home network, or on personal computers on their home network (especially if the workers copied company files to their personal machines to work from home). Blocking access to social media sites and personal email services from the company network reduces the risk of this same event occurring again. For example, if the suspicious emails are blocked from being received by company email servers and accounts, they could still be received into personal email accounts. Though not mentioned, blocking access to the malicious URLs would be a good security defense as well. This issue is not addressed by deploying a web application firewall, updating the company email server, using MFA on the email server, or performing an access review of company files. Although all of these options are good security practices in general, they do not relate specifically to this issue.

- C. Training is teaching employees to perform their work tasks and to comply with the security policy. Training is typically hosted by an organization and is targeted to groups of employees with similar job functions. (A) Education is an endeavor in which students and users learn much more than they actually need to know to perform their work tasks. Education is most often associated with users pursuing certification or seeking job promotion or career advancement. Most education programs are not hosted by the employer but by training organizations or colleges or universities. Education is not provided to workers in groups based on their job positions. (B) Awareness establishes a common baseline or foundation of security understanding across the entire organization and focuses on key or basic topics and issues related to security that all employees must understand. Although it is provided by the organization, it is not targeted to groups of workers since it applies to all employees. (D) Termination is usually targeted at individuals rather than groups of workers with similar job positions. Though large layoff events might fire groups of similar workers, this option is not as accurate as training.

- B, C, D. The activity described in option A is an opportunistic unauthorized access attack, which is not a social engineering attack since there was no interaction with the victim, just the opportunity when the victim walked away. The activities described in options B (hoax), C (phishing, hoax, watering hole attack), and D (vishing) are all examples of social engineering attacks.

- B. The correct answer for these blanks is security champion(s). Often a security champion is a member of a group who decides (or is assigned) to take charge of leading the adoption and integration of security concepts into the group's work activities. Security champions are often non-security employees who take up the mantle to encourage others to support and adopt more security practices and behaviors. The other options are incorrect. A CISO, or chief information security officer, defines and enforces security throughout the organization. The security auditor is the person who manages security logging and reviews the audit trails for signs of compliance or violation. The custodian is the security role that accepts assets from owners and then, based on the owner-assigned classifications, places the asset in the proper IT container where the proper security protections are provided.

- D. Security awareness and training can often be improved through gamification. Gamification is a means to encourage compliance and engagement by integrating common elements of game play into other activities, such as security compliance and behavior change. This can include rewarding compliance behaviors and potentially punishing violating behaviors. Many aspects of game play can be integrated into security training and adoption, such as scoring points, earning achievements or badges (i.e., earn recognition), competing with others, cooperating with others (i.e., team up with coworkers), following a set of common/standard rules, having a defined goal, seeking rewards, developing group stories/experiences, and avoiding pitfalls or negative game events. (A) Program effectiveness evaluation is using some means of verification, such as giving a quiz or monitoring security incident rate changes over time, to measure whether the training is beneficial or a waste of time and resources. This question starts by indicating that security incidents are on the rise, which shows that prior training was ineffective. But the recommendations to change the training are gamification focused. (B) Onboarding is the process of adding new employees to the organization. This is not the concept being described in this scenario. (C) Compliance enforcement is the application of sanctions or consequences for failing to follow policy, training, best practices, and/or regulations.
